[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We live in
extraordinary times.
Breakthroughs in science,
medicine, and consciousness
are happening at an
accelerating rate.
And in the field of health care,
the old, conventional model
relying on surgery
and prescription drugs
is being challenged by a
wave of dramatic, noninvasive
energy-based techniques.
While many of these techniques
are actually centuries old
and are considered controversial
by mainstream Western medicine,
they are generating
worldwide studies
with remarkable results.
We'll explore how this
fascinating field affects
our health, our
society, and our future.
Dr. Bruce Lipton is a
preeminent scientist
in the field of quantum physics,
DNA, and stem cell biology,
and is the winner of the
2009 Goi Peace Award.
He has written two books,
including the best seller,
"The Biology of Belief."
>> In today's world
of health care,
there are two different models
of how the human biology works.
One of them is based
on the physical reality
that everything in the
universe is made out of matter.
And this is a Newtonian view
that conventional medicine
works with.
And the view basically
says that the body
is a machine, it's made out
of chemicals, and genes,
and that if there's anything
wrong with the machine,
you actually adjust
the chemicals
and genes as a primary
source of the problem.
Another view is based
on quantum physics, that
says that the universe is
actually made out of energy,
and everything that we
see as matter is itself
actually energy.
The significance of the
difference between the two
is, invisible forces
play a primary role
in the new understanding
of biology.
The new energy medicine.
And energy becomes entangled.
Meaning everything
that's made out of energy
becomes entangled--
you can't separate it.
So that says, when we're
looking at an individual's life,
we're not looking just
at their physical body.
But we're looking at
their health in regard
to what their
perceptions of the world
are, their family relationships,
their jobs relationships,
world issues at that moment.
Because everything
impinges upon our health.
>> Dr. Beverly Rubik
is a biophysicist,
and is the president of the
Institute for Frontier Science
in San Francisco.
She is renowned for
her exploration of,
and her countless studies,
concerning energy medicine.
>> The old medicine is not
helping us during this era
where chronic degenerative
disease is the major culprit.
It's perfect for things like
trauma, or infectious diseases,
but very limited
in terms of dealing
with our chronic illnesses
like diabetes, and cancer,
and heart disease.
And it's also unsustainable.
It's way too costly.
It's simply not helping people.
And they're getting
horrendous side effects.
In fact, one of the
number one causes of death
is death by medicine.
And so we drastically need
something bigger and better.
And one of the changes is
that enhanced self-care moves
to the forefront of
the new medicine.
That people need to take
more self-responsibility
for their health and wellness.
So it sort of turns the
pyramid upside down.
Where self-care was
sort of brushed aside
by the old
conventional paradigm,
it comes into the forefront.
>> Lynne McTaggart is a
preeminent spokesperson
on consciousness
and the new physics.
She is an award-winning
author of six books,
including the best sellers
"The Field," and "The Intention
Experiment."
>> The new medicine is all
about looking at the body
as a dynamic system.
And understanding that if you
affect one part of the body you
affect the rest of it.
You put medicine on
your arm, and you
create changes in your leg.
In your liver.
Everywhere.
So the new approach is
to approach the body
as a holistic system.
And also an energy system.
And so we don't
have to do things
grossly to our physicality.
We can treat ourselves
through energy.
And treat ourselves
through things
that we can't really see.
>> Linnie Thomas is a
Healing Touch instructor,
and the author of "The
Encyclopedia of Energy
Medicine."
>> Energy medicine has
been around for many,
many thousands of years.
But for written documentation,
we go to the Chinese,
and they started documenting
it about 5,000 years ago.
There are many reasons
for why energy medicine is
becoming so popular.
It's effective.
It's gentle.
It's noninvasive.
And it doesn't
have side effects.
About 55% of the population now
are using alternative medicine
and integrative
medicine, because they
are getting results.
And it's a lot cheaper
than going to a doctor.
>> The late Dr. Candace Pert was
an internationally recognized
neuroscientist and
pharmacologist,
and expert in
mind/body medicine.
>> In the history of medicine,
mind, emotion, spirit,
was completely left out.
This is the Western mainstream
medicine as we know it.
This came from a silly
thing-- from when
Descartes was given the dead
bodies by the Pope to work on.
So everything about mainstream
medicine is sort of lifeless.
What's happening now,
what's so exciting,
is to incorporate the new
paradigm ideas into medicine.
Not just that mind
matters, but mind
is really central to our
health, and to our disease.
>> Probably since
Newton and Descartes,
magic and mysticism has been
ripped out of our lives.
And there's been an
enormous separation
between science and religion.
However, with the
discoveries made
since Einstein and the
advent of quantum physics,
we've understood that the world
is very different from what
we've been told.
And that it is much closer to
what the ancients described.
There is magic.
There is connection
between all things.
>> While many scientific
advances in the future will
undoubtedly be created
from gene editing,
breakthrough research now shows
that our health is not dictated
by our genetic
blueprints after all.
>> Today's view of genetics
has completely changed.
The old view, of which I trained
in and taught medical students,
was a view called
genetic determinism.
And this is the belief that
the genes control your traits.
Not just your structural,
but your physical, emotional,
and behavioral
traits as well, so
that our lives were a printout
of our genetic lineage.
There's a new science
today called epigenetics.
I first saw the nature of
epigenetics 40 years ago,
when I was culturing stem cells.
I had genetically identical
cells in three dishes,
but changed the
environment in each dish.
In one dish they formed muscle.
In one dish the
cells formed bone.
In the third dish,
they formed fat cells.
The important point
was, all the cells
were genetically identical.
Their fates were controlled
by the environment.
Today, this new understanding
of environmental control
over genes is called
epigenetic control.
>> What we're now understanding
is that, in any cell,
the membrane of a cell
is semi-permeable.
And there are a lot of
little protein gatekeepers
there, that are receptors,
that sort of let information
in or out.
And we're now understanding
that everything
in our environment-- our
diet, the air we breathe,
the emotions we hold,
the sum total of how
we live our lives--
affects whether a gene gets
turned on or off.
Now this is profound,
because it completely
contradicts what we think
of as Darwinian genetics.
Is that, we are
driven by our genes.
Well, how can that be if one
little environmental thing
like a vitamin can derail
all of your genetic history?
So scientists are
busy looking at cancer
and all kinds of things
from the epigenome,
and understanding that, really,
we are getting constructed,
in a sense, from outside in.
Not inside out, as we thought.
>> The fate of our cells is
controlled by the chemistry
of our blood.
And the chemistry of
our blood is adjusted
by the way we perceive life.
So that if we open up our eyes
and see love in our presence,
we release chemistry
in the blood,
such as oxytocin,
dopamine, serotonin.
These chemicals promote health
and vitality of the system.
In contrast, however,
if I open up my eyes
and I see something that
threatens me or scares me,
I release a completely different
set of chemicals into my blood,
such as stress
hormones and histamine.
The difference is,
these chemicals
actually shut down my growth,
and prepare me for protection.
So it becomes very
critical on how
we see the world, because
our perceptions are converted
into chemistry, and
the chemistry directly
controls, not just our behavior,
but our genetic expression
as well.
>> As we learn that our
genes can actually be turned
on and off-- not just with
drugs, supplements, and food,
but also by our attitudes--
scientific pioneers are now
exploring how our nonphysical
energy field interacts with
our health.
They call our
field the biofield.
>> Well, the notion of layers
of subtle bodies comes out
of ancient Indian thinking, or
the ancient Oriental medicine.
>> Throughout the ages, mystics
have talked about, you know,
the "source."
The "matrix."
Some sort of
all-encompassing field.
But now, since the advent
of quantum physics,
we've understood that
there is a quantum field.
And physicists are able to do a
number of types of experiments
to demonstrate and
actually measure
what's happening in this field.
>> There is a new understanding
in the relationship of matter
and energy, based
on quantum physics.
And the issues
about energy healing
that are different
from mechanical healing
is that energy involves
invisible waves, which
include thought,
and what, actually,
physicists call the "field."
The field is a whole
collection of all the energy
that makes up the universe.
And it turns out, the field
is what shapes matter.
As Einstein once
remarked, the field
is the sole governing
agency of a particle.
What he was talking about
is that the invisible forces
are primary in shaping
the physical world.
>> Biofield is an organizing
field within and around
the human body.
Or any living thing,
for that matter.
And it's subtle.
And it's very complex,
in that it consists
of many types of
fields that we already
know about-- so-called
electromagnetic fields,
biophotons, or very
low-level particles of light,
infrared emission, the brain
waves and the heart waves.
>> Several decades ago, a German
physicist called Fritz-Albert
Popp, by accident, discovered
that there is light coming out
of living things.
That all living things send
out a tiny current of light.
He called it
biophoton emissions.
And he found that this
light is generated in DNA,
and acts as a kind of global
signaling for the entire body.
And also is a communication
system with the outside world.
And we find that
when somebody is ill
and you apply medicine
to one part of the body,
the light doesn't
just change there.
It changes around the body.
This is an
extraordinary discovery,
because it demonstrates that the
real orchestrator of the body
isn't genes or genetic code.
It's light.
>> When we're
talking about fields,
they actually extend
throughout space,
as far as the universe goes.
So we are radiating, like
stars, very low-level light
into the universe.
And as a result of this, we
cannot put a boundary on one
person's biofield and say, your
biofield stops here and another
one starts over there.
So in some ways, we're actually
all entangled in this web
of life-- of life energy.
And also, the earth has
some dominant frequencies
in its energy
field, one of which
is called the Schumann
resonance, about 7.8
Hertz, which very
interestingly is also
one of the chief
frequencies that's
coming right from our
brains when we're very
relaxed-- about eight Hertz.
So I don't think
it's any accident.
And we cannot clearly
distinguish any separation
between the fields of life
and the fields of earth,
and cosmos.
So that makes it all part
of one rich living universe.
>> Because of these discoveries,
some experts are calling
for a revolutionary new
field-based view of medicine
and the human body.
>> There's a radical
evolution in health care.
And it's brought about
by new modalities that
emphasize energy and vibration.
>> Einstein said, the
field is the only reality.
It's a brilliant phrase,
because it really
encapsulates what things in
the universe actually are.
We think of-- all of us, and all
things-- as discrete objects.
But actually we're part of a
giant quantum energy field.
>> Energy medicine, which
regards the body not just
as a bag of our molecules,
but as primary fields
of information that can
be shifted by different
therapeutics, whether it be
homeopathy, or energy healers,
or devices that put out
certain frequencies to shift
the biofield.
And by shifting the biofield,
we shift the dynamics
of the body toward a movement
toward health and wellness.
>> We find that the atoms
aren't physical themselves.
They're actually
energy vortices.
They're like little
miniature tornadoes.
But every atom is actually
a vibrational field.
The significance of
this is that when
we look at the body through
the new scan systems,
such as PET scans and
CAT scans and MRI scans,
we're actually looking at the
energy profiles of our body.
Not the physical
expression of it.
Significance in healing is
that in quantum physics,
the energy can be
adjusted by other energy,
rather than through chemistry.
And research has now revealed
that energy information signals
are 100 times more efficient
in controlling biology
than our chemical signals.
The net result is,
we will move away
from the pharmaceutical
pursuit of healing
and move into the
energy field, that's
a much more effective and
efficient way of introducing
health into our body.
>> Along with the remarkable
discoveries about the biofield
and genetic behavior, one of the
most extraordinary new fields
of research focuses on how
our emotions affect our health
and consciousness.
The leading pioneer
in this field
is the late Dr.
Candace Pert, author
of the groundbreaking book
"The Molecules of Emotion."
>> Really, the purpose of
"The Molecules of Emotion"
is to regenerate our body/minds.
So every time we think,
every time we emote,
we are moving cells,
we are growing cells,
and changing the fabric of
the body with every thought.
Every thought is
changing our emotions,
and every emotional expression
is rewiring our brain.
And the emotions are
the key, because they're
in the physical realm in
the forms of these molecules
of emotion, but they're also
this mysterious energetic
realm.
The key is that they are
carrying information.
They can carry it
to a synapse that's
a few-- less than
a millimeter away,
or they can carry information
all over the body.
But when you have a
profound emotional trigger,
every single receptor
in your body shifts.
And so that emotion is felt
all over the entire body/mind.
>> Negative thinking, along
with negative emotions-- fear,
anxiety, feeling stressed,
which is most people's state--
really impacts our organs.
It removes blood flow
from all the vital organs
of our bodies-- our stomachs,
our hearts, our brains-- and it
puts blood flow in our muscles.
And so we're ready
to fight and flight.
And when they move positive
energy and positive feelings
back into their
body, that blood flow
starts again to the
vital organs and tissues.
And with it, all the benefits
of bringing in the blood.
Bringing in nutrition.
Taking away waste.
Bringing in oxygen, so cells
can metabolize normally again.
>> What we're thinking,
what we tend to think,
how we hold our muscles, where
they are, our whole structure,
is defined by our
emotional state.
>> Psychologists tell us
that 70% of our thoughts are
negative and redundant.
The new biology,
especially epigenetics,
reveals how our mind and our
perceptions control our genes.
The conscious mind, which
is the more evolutionary
advanced state, is the
creative part of our brain.
In contrast, the
subconscious mind,
while it has some creativity,
is primarily a habit mind.
Nature designed a child's
brain for the first six years
to download data about the
community, life in the family,
and all the principal
rules and organizations
that are involved.
And in fact, a child's
brain doesn't even
express a level of consciousness
as a predominant brain state
until after six.
>> Since our subconscious mind
is a vast storehouse of early
learned behavior, it is key
to find ways to access this
programming, if we wish to
change our ways of being that
no longer serve us.
Many experts have found that
conventional talk therapy
has inherent limitations.
>> The problem with
talk therapy is,
we tend to continually revisit
the hurts and the pains.
And by constantly
going over them,
we're digging deeper
and deeper grooves.
One has to replace that
negative conditioning
with new positive forms.
We have to substitute
new thoughts, basically.
>> Dr. Hyla Cass is a
psychiatrist and a leading
expert in integrative medicine,
and how emotions, stress,
and nutrition affect health.
She was inducted into the
Orthomolecular Medicine
Hall of Fame, and is the author
of more than 10 popular books,
including "8 Weeks
to Vibrant Health."
>> After many years
of medical practice,
it's really clear to me that
nature is the best healer.
Medications may
have their place,
but really, any
kind of condition,
let's see how we can affect our
own body and mind ourselves.
Key to a lot of illness,
and that's stress.
So we have the stresses of life.
And then there's
the old stresses,
the things that are
living in our unconscious
that we may not
even be aware of.
And when we address those and
clean them up, boy, are we ever
in a better place to go from
the stress response to the relax
and restore response,
which is what we really
need to heal ourselves.
>> It takes a lot of
energy to repress memories,
to repress traumas.
So when we have these
bottled up feelings,
they are robbing us
of energy that we
could use for our healing, for
our joy, for our creativity.
That's why it's so important
to find ways, healthy ways,
to make other choices.
We know now that there is no
separation between the brain
and the immune system.
Every emotion plays an important
physiological role in our body.
Studies of remarkable
recoveries have
shown that, so often,
tumor shrinkage is actually
accompanied by a
sudden realization
that the person is
angry at somebody.
A sudden permission
to start to have
profound emotional expression.
>> The important understanding
from new science is that
our lives are essentially
printout of the subconscious
mind, operating 95% of the time.
One of the biggest
desires of people
is to change their lives.
And the issue about
change becomes critical
because the subconscious mind
does not learn in the same way
that the conscious mind learns.
The conscious mind can
learn by reading a book.
Subconscious mind requires
repeating things over and over
again, or getting into a brain
state by which information
can be directly downloaded
in the subconscious mind.
So the whole
understanding is this--
we need to find ways of
which we can actively
engage new programs in
the subconscious mind.
>> Energy healing, and, really,
touch therapy, can direct--
in a very gentle way, can direct
our attention to some very
deep, old, suppressed stuff,
so that it begins to come out
quite dramatically and subtly.
You don't even need to go
through all the trauma that
caused it.
They can enter in
a different place.
Not where talk is
initiated, but they
can come in through
a different spot
in the psychosomatic network.
Everything's about the
way we're wired up.
We have choice.
Unlike the other
animals, we have choice.
>> We become what we think.
We become the energy
field that we create.
The energy manifests at the
physical level of the body,
in the blood and the tissues.
>> Our most recent findings
from quantum physics and from
the biochemistry of emotions
have given us new insights
as to why and how many energy
healing methods work so deeply
and powerfully.
Using a wide range of
nonverbal energetic practices,
they access alternative
pathways to the brain
to effect deep healing.
>> A number of scientists around
the world have been looking
at, studying energy healers, to
try to isolate what that energy
is that they sent.
And with increase in
electrical energy,
there's a surge in voltage.
There's also a surge
of magnetic energy.
And there's a huge surge in
these biophoton emissions--
the current of light
coming from the body--
particularly from a
healer's dominant hand.
Now, we're not talking
about ordinary energy,
because we know that healing
can occur over vast distances.
So probably what's going on
here is much more complicated.
There's probably some
sort of quantum effect
which doesn't require
any kind of distance,
that can be the same effect
over any kind of distance.
Or it may be a combination
of all of the above.
>> I've done numerous studies
since about 1978 on energy
healing.
And one of the systems
that I've studied
are cell cultures
in the laboratory.
And I've found beneficial
effects repeatedly
on cells in the lab.
Especially cells
that needed healing.
That've been damaged by
antibiotics, or temperature
shocks.
When healers placed their
hands on the cultures,
or nearby, or even in
distant healing cases,
the cells recovered faster
than the control cultures
that were not treated by them.
And that's a remarkable
effect, because it
shows that the power
of energy healing
goes beyond the biology of
belief, or a placebo effect.
The fact that cell
cultures can respond
means that the
cells in our bodies
are also responding
to energy healing.
Not just our minds.
But it's working at all
the levels of our beings.
>> The received wisdom in
orthodox medicine is that
energy healing has no
evidence and doesn't work.
Nothing could be
further from the truth.
There are at least 150
excellent scientific studies
of energy healing.
And these are those
gold standard,
randomized, double-blind
type studies
that are used in science.
And they demonstrate
a very robust effect.
>> For me, and for most of the
modalities that I have studied,
which is about 200
different modalities,
most healers start with setting
an intention for the highest
good of the client.
A client does not have to
believe in what is happening.
All he or she has to do is
to express a willingness.
The healer is like
a garden hose,
and the energy flows through
the healer to the client.
I was called in by one of
my clients for his mother.
She had had a stroke that
morning, and was dying.
The whole family was there.
I had the whole
family touch her,
and then I put one hand
on one side of her head,
and one hand on the other.
Now, she had had
a serious stroke,
and the CAT scan showed
that 65% of her brain
had been damaged by that stroke.
So I am with my hands like
this, and they got very hot.
And they started to shake.
And I couldn't stop the shaking.
And the heat got very
intense, and I was
afraid I was going to burn her.
And all of a sudden, after
about 15 minutes of this,
she woke up, the paralysis
was completely gone,
and she was fine.
>> The biofield can regulate,
because it travels at the speed
of light.
So it totally unifies the
organism into a coherent whole,
and moves the organism
into a new dynamic mode.
And we call that homeodynamics.
I like to think about the
biofield as an orchestra
of different energies,
different frequencies,
just like you'd hear,
literally, a symphony.
Complex fields of infrared and
magnetic energy, visible light,
bioelectricity,
and probably more.
And then you may ask,
well, who is the conductor?
The mind is.
Where mind goes, energy flows.
And blood and flesh follow.
So the mind is the
supreme conductor
of this symphony
of the biofield.
And the biofield literally
moves at the speed of light,
because fields do
this, and makes
the body a coherent
whole, in response
to thought, and in
response to stimuli
such as energy medicine.
Homeopathy, for example,
can work this fast,
by contrast to
pharmaceutical drugs, which
take time to be metabolized,
and work very slowly.
So we're actually working
at a much deeper level
in energy medicine.
We're working at a more
primary level of life
that supersedes the physical.
Because the
biofield, in my view,
is the bottom line regulator
of the physiology and chemistry
of the body with the mind.
And so if we can work at
that level with our medicine,
then we can shift ourselves,
and self-healing will happen.
>> There was one study looking
at magnetic energy emanating
from one group of healers and
comparing that to the energy
emanating from master healers.
And they found that the
master healers essentially
generated 1/3 more
magnetic energy
than the ordinary healers.
>> One highly respected
energy healing method featured
in the book "The Encyclopedia
of Energy Medicine"
is One Light Healing Touch, an
international energy healing
and mystery school located in
the United States and Germany.
The school was founded by
Ron Lavin, a renowned energy
healer and gifted psychic.
He's also the creator of
"One Light Healing Touch
Journeys," a CD series of
empowering healing practices.
Ron has been tested,
and was found
to be running the master
healer energy frequency.
>> Humankind was truly given
a profound legacy in hands-on
healing.
Today there is a resurgence
of healing all over the world.
Energy healing is part of
the medicine for an evolving
new world.
I was born clairvoyant,
clairsentient, clairaudient,
and claircognizant.
Which means that I could see,
hear, know, and feel the energy
of other people and of spirit.
My life has been about
receiving these messages,
and understanding what it is
that spirit's guiding me to do.
I saw where people were
holding energy in their bodies
and would not express what
they were feeling or thinking.
And this was a very
painful way for people
to move through the world.
I've studied with lamas
and gurus, shamans
and exceptional teachers of
all kinds, for many years.
And then I had a
pivotal experience.
I woke up one morning
and had a painful groin.
And realized after seeing a
doctor that I needed a hernia
operation.
The doctor said that for $5,000,
and after four days of rest,
I would be fine.
And I asked him if he knew
what was causing the hernia,
and if he could guarantee me
that it wouldn't come back.
And he said that he had
no idea what caused it,
and he was interested
in taking care of it,
but that was as
far as he could go.
And I was studying with a gifted
Masonic teacher at the time.
And I asked him
about a dream that I
had had of sewing up this
hernia with a silver thread.
And he said that it
would work perfectly,
and he would hold the energy
for me while I performed this.
And it took 30 seconds, and
I was fine one minute after.
And the dream instructed me to
do this again a couple of days
later, to make sure.
And I created a silver
thread, and I sewed it up,
and I was fine.
And in that moment, I knew and
understood to the core of me
that my life would be about
doing spiritual and energy
healing.
And that was 30 years ago.
And I've never had a
return of the hernia.
>> Ron Lavin has participated in
five remarkable distant healing
studies with the National
Institutes of Health,
including the landmark study on
AIDS patients conducted by Dr.
Elisabeth Targ.
>> It was an honor
to be a part of Dr.
Elisabeth Targ's study
on end stage AIDS.
And I was particularly
pleased and delighted when
I learned that so many
of the participants
had a marked decrease in
their secondary diseases.
>> One of the most
well-researched studies
of distant energy healing
was conducted by the late
psychiatrist Dr. Elisabeth Targ.
She decided to create a study of
AIDS patients in the late '80s,
before all of the medicine
now available to them.
They were in the
last stages of AIDS.
She gathered together an
eclectic group of 40 healers
around America.
None of the healers had
actually met the people
they were going to heal.
All they received from Elisabeth
was a photo, a T-cell count,
and a name.
And they also took turns
healing the various patients.
She had divided
the group in half,
so that half got the
healing and half didn't.
And afterwards, she
had had to conclude
that the patients given healing
were better in every way.
40% of the patients who were
members of the controlled,
who did not get the healing,
died by the end of the study.
Whereas all of the
patients who had received
the healings were not
only alive, but healthier
in every regard.
They had longer survival.
They had fewer side effects.
They had fewer
additional illnesses.
They were improved in every way.
>> The One Light Healing Touch
school is highly experiential,
as the instructors train
students in the use of more
than 50 self-healing practices,
including movement, meditation,
visualization, sound
work, breath work,
and sacred ceremony, as well
as 33 advanced energy healing
techniques to heal
themselves and others.
And the One Light
Healing Touch students
are taught how to access
a high level of energy
to affect
transformational healings.
In fact, the producer
of this documentary
became a practitioner instructor
after experiencing and seeing
many remarkable
healings from this work.
>> During the One Light
Healing Touch school,
I learned a process called
long distance healing.
And I was guided to use
it on a family member who
was a very difficult person.
And we had been out of
communication, both verbally
and written, for
a number of years.
Following the healing,
four days later,
I received a note
from this person.
On one sheet of paper were
the words "thank you."
Clearly the energies
had shifted.
>> Many of our students
have reported a wide range
of physical and
emotional healings.
>> The effects of working with
the school have been dramatic.
Not only have I been
able to heal myself
from the bout of
chronic fatigue syndrome
I had, but I'm also able to
overcome some of the panic
attack and anxiety
issues I had been dealing
with since late childhood.
Besides that, some
of the other effects
were that I feel more
connected, not only to my heart,
but to my true higher self.
And being more
connected to my heart
has helped me through a lot
of difficult times in my life,
and given me the
guidance to continue
reaching for higher levels,
higher goals in my life
right now.
>> Heart healing remains at the
core of all of our practices,
and all of our spiritual work.
Forgiveness is an essential
aspect of healing.
Especially learning
to forgive ourselves.
As we begin to
forgive ourselves,
we then begin to forgive others.
And eventually, forgiveness
becomes a full working partner
in our relationship with life.
Forgiveness is an
essential piece
to learn to being at
peace with ourselves
and to fulfill our
purpose for being.
Working with our techniques
and practices on a daily basis
heals the heart.
It releases tension and
stress, brings in light,
helps us to come into harmony
with our purpose for being.
>> Many of the One Light Healing
Touch techniques work on deep
subconscious levels to
release long-held blockages
and programming.
This allows students and
clients to experience
transformational
and lasting change.
>> I came to One Light Healing
Touch after suffering for many
years with some sadness that I
could not quite put my finger
on.
I had tried talk therapy.
That didn't seem to
really work, and I was
looking for some other answers.
And as I went through the school
and learned the techniques
and how to release old
programming, what I found
was joy.
And I continue to use
these practices every day,
and all my friends
and family have
seen a huge difference in me.
>> I have suffered from low
back pain for a number of years.
And during the second
weekend of the training,
we did a process
where we released
a lot of emotional issues.
And I felt the shift
in my body after that.
And a week later I went
to my chiropractor,
and she said that there was an
amazing shift in my pelvic area
which she couldn't explain, and
I have remained pain free ever
since.
>> Qigong is another ancient,
powerful self-healing energy
practice.
It originated in China
more than 5,000 years ago.
Now, millions worldwide practice
the many different methods
of Qigong that
include exercises,
breath work, visualizations,
and meditations.
And the latest studies are
showing extraordinary results.
Gary Renza is an
herbalist and writer,
and is a highly respected
Qigong instructor
in Cold Spring, New York.
>> Qigong is a centuries-old
practice whose main purpose is
to balance the energy in
and around one's body.
And at a certain point
in their practice,
one will start to feel
this movement of energy.
And once they feel the
movement of energy,
the deep breathing
behind the practice of it
allows the result to get to a
cellular level, for healing,
for the purpose of longevity.
The more we can keep
our cells alive,
the more we keep
our bodies alive.
>> Ken Cohen from Colorado
is a Qigong master,
and teaches all
aspects of Qigong.
He is a renowned China
scholar, and is the author
of numerous CDs,
DVDs, and books,
including the internationally
acclaimed "The Way of Qigong."
>> Qigong, to me, is very
basic, very down to earth.
I've been doing this for about
40-- a little over 40 years.
So when I was first starting,
I said to my teacher,
"Master Chan, what would you
say is the fundamental reason
for doing Qigong?"
He said, "Oh, we have
to master the four
virtues of being a human being.
How to lie down, how to sit,
how to stand, how to walk."
The problem is, we are in such
a fragmented, rushed society
that we're never doing
those things in a way that
really brings enjoyment.
One of the consequences of
the quick pace of life today
and the amount of stress that
so many people are under,
especially racing
against the clock,
is that the breathing
rate tends to be too fast.
So the average breathing
rate, for example in the US,
is about 17 breaths per minute.
If someone is having a problem
with anxiety or even a panic
attack, it can go up to
20, 22 breaths per minute.
When you practice Qigong,
within a month of practice,
most of my students
are breathing
at about 7 breaths per minute.
Which is more the optimal rate.
That means that it takes
less breaths and less effort
to drive the necessary
oxygen into your cells.
It also means more
mental clarity.
The brain takes up 2%
of the body's weight,
but requires 20% of the
body's available oxygen.
If you can practice
a technique that
delivers more
oxygen to the brain
and that also slows down the
breathing rate so it takes
less breaths, less effort,
to get that oxygen there,
there is a dramatic effect
on health and energy.
>> Biophysicist Dr. Beverly
Rubik found dramatic effects
in the biofields of
Qigong practitioners.
>> I measured the biofields
of many people who practice
Qigong, say, in
one Qigong class,
measuring them before and
after the Qigong class.
And found great improvements
in their biofield.
More symmetry,
right/left symmetry.
Smoother, brighter expansions
of energy following Qigong.
>> Qigong is a wonderful
exercise for balancing
and healing the mind,
the body, and the spirit,
by way of posture,
breath, and awareness,
or the regulation of the mind.
One student in
particular came to me
with joint pain and the
inability to close her hand.
She also had weak bones.
After about a year of
dedicated practice,
she came back with the
results of her recent tests,
and her arthritis had diminished
exceedingly, in her hands,
especially, and her bone
density came back stronger.
>> We know that at least 75%
of all the diseases a person
develops as an adult
are not due to genetics.
Or what the Chinese would call
your original or inherited chi.
Rather, we develop
these diseases
because of behavioral
choices that
cause either genetic
suppression or expression.
So even if you've had a family
history of three generations
of breast cancer,
that doesn't mean
you're doomed to breast cancer.
If you make a systemic
overall change,
then the chances go more in
your favor of never developing
that illness, even if there
is the genetic tendency.
I've seen so many
extraordinary benefits
that Qigong has had on
cancer, on heart disease
and diabetes, much of
this supported by very
good published research.
A group of 48 patients with
type 2 diabetes-- adult
onset diabetes-- and they
were all doing Qigong.
95% had normalized blood
sugar within one month
of regular practice.
I've seen similar results among
my own students, some of whom
were on insulin at the start
of an eight-week program,
and at the end of
the eight weeks,
with their doctor's permission,
they were off of the insulin.
So it seems that there
is something about Qigong
that increases the insulin
sensitivity of cells.
Which is important
for all of us,
if we want to have a
healthier metabolism.
>> I was diagnosed with
diabetes about six years ago,
and my blood sugar was 791.
And so I was on medication
for probably the year,
and I went to my doctor and
I asked him how long would I
have to be on medication?
And he said, for
the rest your life.
And so I got serious
about Qigong,
and I worked at Qigong daily.
And so I stopped-- I
threw my pills away,
and I kept monitoring my
sugar-- my blood sugar--
and I went to my doctor and, you
know, I showed him the numbers.
And he said, you're right.
You don't need it anymore.
And so it's been good
for me and it's just
health-- better health.
>> When I came to study
with Ken, I was exhausted.
Emotionally exhausted.
Physically exhausted.
To the extent that I would
call chronic fatigue.
Depressed, emotionally.
From the day I started working
with the primordial Qigong,
it was like tapping
into a nurturing
force that was everywhere.
My energy level
started to return.
My relationships with people
became better, more harmonious.
I was naturally happy
to see my friends.
>> There is actually a database
available in English that has
over 4,000 abstracts on
Qigong research and clinical
application.
So there are many,
many studies that
have been performed in the
West, including the United
States and Europe, and
of course in China,
that really, I think,
prove-- I mean,
I really think I need to say
this-- that it's not simply
a hypothesis.
For certain illnesses, for
certain kinds of conditions,
there's no longer
a burden of proof.
We can see extraordinary effects
on many disease conditions.
>> Ken Cohen has demonstrated
the powerful nature of Qigong
in many hospital studies
across the country.
One study found that Ken's brain
waves changed more than 70%
while practicing Qigong,
including strong gamma
waves, which are linked with
the prevention of dementia.
Ken also practices medical
Qigong, also called Qi Healing,
which is showing exceptional
results both in China
and the US.
>> It's called
external Qi Healing.
Essentially, the healer
uses the energy field
from his or her hands to
affect a new state of balance
in the client.
Qigong has a very bright future.
It's growing really quickly.
More and more doctors and making
referrals to Qigong and tai
chi practitioners, for patient
education, and for themselves,
to prevent healer burnout.
If you're dealing with
patients all day long,
it's easy to get burned out.
So we need to Qigong
also for the healer,
to take care of him or herself.
>> Dr. Beverly Rubik
has found that, ideally,
all energy practitioners need
to take the time to practice,
to achieve the most
beneficial results.
>> My research has shown that
it takes many classes to produce
a lasting change
in the biofield.
So whether it's yoga, Qigong,
or visiting an energy healer,
meditative practices,
all of these
can produce profound
changes in the biofield.
But they need to be
regular practices.
And I found a threshold of about
two years of a regular practice
to make a lasting change
in the energy field.
>> Because of the limitations
of conventional therapy,
some experts in energy medicine
and mind/body techniques have
searched to find ways to affect
consciousness and deep healing.
One striking example
is mental imagery.
It allows images
to work directly
on our subconscious mind.
Dr. Gerry Epstein
of New York City
is a psychiatrist, and a leading
pioneer in mental imagery
and integrative medicine.
He is the director of
the American Institute
for Mental Imagery, and
the author of many CD
sets and seven books, including
the best seller "Healing
Visualizations."
>> I came to this work in 1974.
I was a traditional psychiatrist
and a psychoanalyst,
and I visited Israel.
And by great good
fortune, I was introduced
to a woman named Colette
Aboulker Muscat, who
seemed to be getting
and achieving
greater results in the work that
she was doing, which I never
heard of before, called
"mental imagery," than I
had through my
conventional practice.
And I became an
apprentice, actually,
and became her student,
and trained with her
for nine years.
This is really the application
of Western spiritual life
into a therapeutic framework.
The range of usage of
mental imagery is unlimited.
It's used for so many different
kinds of circumstances
and conditions-- physical,
emotional, social, mental,
moral-- any kind of
circumstance you can think of,
it's applicable.
Mental imagery has a long
and distinguished history.
It goes back to ancient Egypt
and the ancient Near East,
and we call it, in fact,
the hieroglyph of the mind.
And as such, it is the
natural and true language
of inner life.
And we in turn use it as
a way to direct our being
to change, and to heal, and to
shift its direction in life.
This is what the body
responds to-- a response
to this inner language.
We generally tend
to do it short,
because we call it a
homeopathy of the mind.
So it's a micro input
for a macro output.
It only takes some seconds--
really, a few seconds
to maybe up to 20, 30 seconds.
So you do it when you wake up in
the morning to start your day.
You do it at night at
the end of the day.
The way to do the imagery
practice is for 21 days.
We know that it takes up to
three weeks to change a habit
or break a habit.
It is something
that anyone can do.
>> Basically, I would say
mental imagery is like having
a treasure chest.
And you can just reach in there
and pull out anything you need,
and it's all inside of you.
>> Mental imagery has allowed me
to learn to live in the present
moment, and not be defined
by my past history.
I work as an artist,
and I've also
felt that when I come
into the studio now,
I have a blank canvas, and I
don't bring a lot of baggage
with me.
And I have been able
to go into myself
and find the
beautiful things there
that I can learn to express.
>> I was deeply unhappy.
I feel like I'd had my big
disappointment, in the sense
that life just wasn't going
the way I wanted it to.
Mental imagery has given
me a way and a direction
away from that life.
My inner state is-- I
have a lot of fun now.
And I basically feel like
I dance through life.
>> Gerry Epstein's healing
imagery literally saved
the life of patient Greg Moore.
>> Just over a year ago, I
had a massive heart attack.
And it turns out that I
needed, actually, a new heart.
So I went on the waiting list
to get a heart transplant, which
ended up taking 10 months
before I found a suitable donor.
Well, the heart
surgery itself was
a major success, except
three days later there
was a major complication
with my leg, of all things.
The leg rejected the transplant.
>> Well, when I awoke
from anesthesia,
the doctors were telling me that
it looked like the only option
was going to be amputation,
which was certainly alarming
to me.
I said, we need to
look at other options,
because I'm not ready
to go that route.
Over that weekend, one of
Gerry Epstein's practitioners
came to visit me and taught
me a few exercises of imagery,
and I applied them.
Well, the next morning
when I woke up,
my foot, which I had
had no sensation in
and could not move
at all, I was moving
my toes, just slightly, and
I found sensation in my foot.
Well, I continued the exercises,
and within a few more days
after that, I was walking, much
to the surprise and delight
of my nurses and doctors.
>> The exercise that I've given
you is one of the exercises
that we do for nervous
system regeneration.
You've actually have
regenerated your nervous system.
And it was shown by the studies
they did on your nerves,
because they took electrical
studies of your nerves
and your muscles while you were
going through this process.
And where it was
dead to begin with,
they saw that it
came back to life.
That's what gave them the
awesome feeling that they'd
never seen anything like this.
>> When I go back
to the hospital now,
the nurses and doctors are
rather amazed to see me walking
in without any assistance.
I feel like I can enjoy life
again, and just get back
to normal. (SINGING) Loosen
up and start to limber,
can't you hear that hot marimba?
Let yourself go.
I'm a big bandleader, and
I feel like I can finally
get back to living again.
And certainly through Gerry
Epstein's mental imagery,
I can do just that.
Start living again.
(SINGING) Butcher,
banker, clerk and
grocer, let yourself go.
>> Doctor Alan Gass is head of
the heart transplant team that
worked on Greg Moore.
He is the Medical Director
of Cardiac Transplantation
and Mechanical Circulatory
Support at Westchester Medical
Center.
>> After several days
of using imagery,
Greg was scheduled to
go to the operation,
probably to have
his leg amputated.
And when the vascular surgeon
opened up the incision,
he was amazed at not only the
degree of lack of progression,
but he actually saw the
muscle becoming pinker,
and it looked like
it was healing.
And it was not anything
that we had done.
It was really, I think,
what the imagery had done.
The reason I have so much
confidence in mental imagery
is because of a personal
experience I had two years ago.
I was riding my bike
in Central Park,
and had an accident
with another rider,
and fell and broke my hip.
And when I went to see--
to the emergency room,
they did an x-ray.
And what I had was a
crush fracture of the hip.
But also, the neck of
the hip was fractured,
and there was a gap in the bone.
And it was about a millimeter--
close to requiring surgery.
But we opted to do physical
therapy to avoid surgery,
and then I adopted
mental imagery.
Now, what my imagery
exercise was, was,
if you've ever seen a baker's
tool to put icing on a cake
where they squeeze out the
icing, I envisioned in my mind
that that was liquid
bone, and I was putting it
into that gap in the bone.
And within a few
weeks, my second x-ray
showed this fluffy
material inside that gap.
And the orthopedic
surgeon was amazed.
And he said, that
looks like bone.
And I was not surprised.
And within two months,
I was back on my bike.
So I avoided surgery,
and I was back on my bike
riding 50 miles within two
months after a hip fracture.
>> Science is now demonstrating
groundbreaking research
on the effectiveness
of mental imagery.
>> Over the past 40 years,
there's been a wealth
of experimental research
that's been done on the imagery
process to attest to
its validity and how
it's so powerful to bring
changes in the human system.
Changes in white blood
cells, changes in hemoglobin,
changes in heart rate--
changes in all different kinds
of physiological processes.
I myself have participated
in two studies
that have demonstrated this.
Another aspect of
the differences
between the conventional
and the ancient model
is that we look at disease
in an entirely different way.
The ancient system
of health care
always put the sufferer
directly into the position
of being responsible for his
own or her own condition.
The tools were
given to the person
to take part actively
in finding their own way
to their own healing.
The difference between mental
imagery and visualization,
as I see it, is that
the imagery experience
is an act of discovery.
It resides within us.
It's a repository of
knowledge that exists for us.
Visualization is something
that you conjure up.
A goal that you intend about
something known to you.
And you have a certain
result in mind,
such as athletes who
use it all the time.
They use it in baseball,
and golf, and skiing,
and you can see the whole
course as you're going downhill,
and you can visualize it, so you
get yourself into an experience
where you're getting
to an outcome
that you are
intending to manifest.
Whereas for the image, it's a
spontaneous act of discovery
where you don't know what you
are going to come up with.
And then opens a door for
you, because it gives you
an insight and understanding
about your life.
Something unexpected
and spontaneous.
And you have the power
within you to do that.
You don't need to depend on
something outside of yourself.
>> Now, with the dawning of
explosive new discoveries
in quantum physics, genetics,
and the human energy field,
we are seeing momentous changes
in the way we approach health
care.
Countless studies are revealing
the remarkable effectiveness
of energy medicine.
People the world over are now
using powerful energy healing
and mind/body techniques
for their own health care
to help achieve optimum
health, and to bring
through the higher vibratory
energies of balance and peace.
As this empowering wave
ripples throughout our world,
it creates transformational
shifts in consciousness,
and contributes to the
evolution of humanity.
>> With energy medicine, we're
really touching the closest
thing to the soul.
The spirit of humanity.
There's something much bigger
that this interest and rise
in energy medicine
is contributing to.
I see the next step for
evolution of humanity
is to really open up to using
their minds more powerfully,
in terms of the power
of positive thinking.
The power of positive energy.
If we want to establish
a more positive future,
then we need to start
visualizing and intending
that future together.
And I think we can do that.
And I think that energy
medicine is teaching us
how this is possible.
It will be much more powerful
as greater numbers reach out
and make this shift happen.
[MUSIC PLAYING]